---
title: "Improved fault analysis on SIMECK ciphers"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-09-15-simeck
excerpt: 'In this paper, under the one bit-flip model, we propose a new efficient fault analysis attack on SIMECK ciphers. Compared to those previously reported attacks, our attack can recover the full master key by injecting faults into only a single round of all SIMECK family members.'
date: 2021-09-15
venue: 'Journal of Cryptographic Engineering'
paperurl: 'https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13389-021-00263-w'
citation: 'Duc-Phong Le, Rongxing Lu, Ali A. Ghorbani. (2022). &quot;Improved fault analysis on SIMECK ciphers.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 12(2).'
---
The advances of Internet of Things (IoT) have had a fundamental impact and influence on sharping our rich living experiences. However, since IoT devices are usually resource-constrained, lightweight block ciphers have played a major role in serving as a building block for secure IoT protocols. In CHES 2015, SIMECK, a family of block ciphers, was designed for resource-constrained IoT devices. Since its publication, there have been many analyses on its security. In this paper, under the one bit-flip model, we propose a new efficient fault analysis attack on SIMECK ciphers. Compared to those previously reported attacks, our attack can recover the full master key by injecting faults into only a single round of all SIMECK family members. This property is crucial, as it is infeasible for an attacker to inject faults into different rounds of a SIMECK implementation on IoT devices in the real world. Specifically, our attack is characterized by exercising a deep analysis of differential trail between the correct and faulty immediate ciphertexts. Extensive simulation evaluations are conducted, and the results demonstrate the effectiveness and correctness of our proposed attack.

[Download paper here](http://dple.github.io/files/simeck.pdf)

[Download code here](https://github.com/dple/DFA_Simeck)

**Recommended citation**: Duc-Phong Le, Rongxing Lu, Ali A. Ghorbani. (2022). "Improved fault analysis on SIMECK ciphers." <i>Journal of Cryptographic Engineering</i>. 12(2).